---
layout: grid
categories: handbook
---

# Offline

Many of our users can either be living in a low-bandwidth or sometimes with no connectivity place all around the world. Using our apps sometimes can be hard for many of our users therefore implementing offline feature is very important.

The user still needs to be online for the first time to download all the assets in order to run the application offline.

## appcache
There are multiple ways to create offline web applications and one of those is appcache. HTML5 provides an application caching mechanism that lets web-based applications run offline. Application Cache (AppCache) interface to specify resources that the browser should cache and make available to offline users. Applications that are cached load and work correctly even if users click the refresh button when they are offline.

Using an application cache gives an application the following benefits:

* Offline browsing: users can navigate a site even when they are offline.
* Speed: cached resources are local, and therefore load faster.
* Reduced server load: the browser only downloads resources that have changed from the server.

### manifest file
With application cache it is easy to make an offline version of a web application, by creating a cache manifest file.

#### Structure of a manifest file

```
CACHE MANIFEST
index.html
stylesheet.css
images/logo.png
scripts/main.js
http://cdn.example.com/scripts/main.js
```

#### Enabling the application cache

```
<html manifest="example.appcache">
  ...
</html>
```

## save user's state

Once the user is using our app in offline mode there are many ways to capture their state or any feedback/input until they're connected to the internet again. These are the list of JavaScript frameworks, libraries that will allow us to implement ways to capture user's state for offline usage.

* [Firebase](https://www.firebase.com/)
* [MakeDrive](https://github.com/mozilla/makedrive)
* [LocalStorage](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/localStorage) (***native browser's feature***)
* [LocalForage](https://github.com/mozilla/localforage)

## connectivity required

There are certain action required user to be connect to the internet to communicate with our server. This may be an issue since it will cause the application to fail to communicate with our server (or database). Such an event we may save the state of the application by using one of the above library where possible and notify the user by displaying a message to the let them know that connectivity to the network is required to complete their action.

### WIP
